Escaping an abusive environment
— an abusive relationship, family,
or ideological group —
can draw deeply on your well of inner resources.
Your patience, your resilience, your integrity
your determination, your ego.
All of these can be severely tested
as you disentangle yourself from an elaborate
nexus of false ideas.
Unfortunately, the poison can go a lot deeper
than we think.
As we move on with our lives, we don’t realise
some of the malignancy we thought
we’d gotten rid of
has hitched a ride with us.
Without knowing it, we can find ourselves
copying some of the destructive behaviour
we thought we’d left behind.
It’s understandable.
In abusive environments, unhealthy behaviour
gets normalised.
We learn from bad examples.
We also develop distorted coping strategies
to deal with the abuse.
Ways of shutting down and protecting ourselves.
Sometimes we carry these strategies over into
our new relationships
not realising how destructive they are,
or how they echo our abusers’ behaviour.
For many former targets of abuse
the idea that they’re copying their abusers
in any way is repugnant.
But later I’ll be looking at how apparently
opposing mindsets
can sometimes produce
similar destructive behaviour.
Copying our enemies can have significant knock-on
effects in a few distinct areas.
It can affect our ability to grow as an individual.
It can affect how we relate to other escapees
who’ve made it out of abusive environments
and how we relate to the people who remain
inside abusive environments
including the ways we might try to open their
eyes to the abuse.
I want to explore all these areas.
To give that exploration context
I want to briefly reflect on how we get
drawn into abuse
and how we escape from it.
Some people are born into abuse.
Some submit to it in their adulthood.
The goal’s the same at any age.
Whether they come in the form of partners,
family members or members of ideological groups
abusers aim to get us to accept their distorted
version of reality uncritically as the truth.
Over time, child and adult targets have their
individuality progressively suppressed.
Acts of independence are met with shaming
or punishment
so that targets come to associate individuality
with guilt or fear.
They’re trained not to trust their own senses
and critical reasoning.
They’re taught instead to seek
external validation from their abusers
who, in effect, become their dealers,
controlling their supply of self-worth.
Abusive systems all push the same message:
that a sense of worth is only valid
if it’s supplied by other people
and that when we try to supply our own self-worth
it’s an inferior corrupted product.
Eventually, targets become fully-fledged actors
on their abusers’ stage
sticking rigidly to the script
their abusers give them.
Even though they’ve been transformed
almost beyond recognition
remnants of their former selves remain,
albeit deeply suppressed.
Even people indoctrinated as very young children
can sometimes later remember
that brief period in childhood
when they first started thinking for themselves
and when they felt no concern
about asking awkward questions.
They remember how silly the answers sounded
and how they felt free to say so.
But then the punishment kicked in hard
and the laughing stopped.
And their connection to that authentic individual
they used to be
gradually faded from view as they became
immersed in their abuser’s script.
For some of us, that connection
with our authentic selves eventually returns.
It happens differently for each person.
It could be discovering
a question we can’t answer
a logical contradiction, a hypocrisy, a lie.
It could be seeing people mistreated with
an extremity we weren’t prepared for
or finding unexpected allies in people we’d
previously been turned against by our abusers.
And so on.
Whatever it is, we realise
there’s a serious problem
with the version of reality we’ve been handed.
For some folks, the spell is instantly broken.
For others, the process can take
weeks, months, years.
But it’s begun. We’ve identified that
there’s a problem.
Some of us will try to solve it ourselves
— only to find more problems.
We begin to see some of the massive distortions
used to hold the abuser’s
false reality together.
Without realising it, we’ve kick-started
our independent thinking.
We’ve begun to lean on our own understanding
to validate our own experience.
Part of our long-suppressed individuality
is waking up.
Many of us make an understandable mistake.
We consult other members of the abusive system.
But chances are, from their angle, the only
thing that seems off is us.
They’ll assume the fault is with us
and explain to us
how we need to approach the problem
from another direction.
If your problem is that your father is tearing
your family apart with malicious attacks
you might be told to focus on
everything he’s done for you.
If your problem is that the religion you were
taught to believe
was all about love is full of promises of
sadistic torture
you might be told to trust that there must
be good reasons for that torture
even if you can’t understand them.
If your problem is that the group you believed
was fighting for equality
is routinely perpetrating gross inequalities
you might be told some people
are more equal than others.
By consulting our fellow members,
we’re seeking answers from the wrong people.
To be able to comprehend
the problem we’re presenting
they would have to go off-script.
Chances are they can’t.
It can be extremely isolating when we start
going against the abuser’s script.
We can forget how powerful its grip can be.
When we share our concerns, we’re repeatedly
met with blank faces
and treated as if we’re the problem.
As we investigate deeper
darker layers of problems
it can feel like we get blanked out completely
as if we’re speaking another language.
Although our concerns are met with silence,
avoidance and denial
sometimes we’ll later find out we did get
through to some people
who began to look around at what they’d
been accepting and open their eyes.
Things come into a whole new focus for them
when they begin to see the problems we’re
pointing out.
But seeing the truth doesn’t mean
they’ll take action.
For them, action might risk levels of discomfort
or loss they’re not ready for.
Instead, they might choose to go along with
the false reality
and try and find ways to minimise
the problems they saw.
They might tell themselves
that every group has its flaws.
Which is true.
But not every group condones and enables abuse.
Critics don’t last long in abusive environments.
The choice tends to be stark. Comply or leave.
Sometimes the choice is made for us when we
get formally discarded and shunned.
Even though it’s an abusive situation,
leaving can be tough.
We sometimes have to work through
lots of emotions
and let go of powerful fantasies
that things can be fixed;
that there’s always hope for change.
These are just forms of denial and bargaining.
Eventually we accept that the abuse
is going to continue.
When we leave an abusive situation
the ground ahead can seem patchy
and shaky at the start.
But gradually it begins to fill out.
We begin to walk around more confidently
in our new free terrain.
Our life slowly begins to find
some shape again.
But sometimes progress
suddenly seems to stop.
We can find ourselves getting tangled up
in old familiar patterns.
Sometimes we’re dealing with
what are called ‘fleas’.
The term comes from the phrase
‘When you lie down with dogs,
you get up with fleas’.
Fleas are the maladaptive habits and traits
we’ve picked up from the abusive environment
and they vary from person to person.
An example of a flea might be triangulation.
Triangulation is a manipulative strategy
used by abusers
where a third party is used to play people
off against each other.
Targets might have their achievements negatively
compared with someone else.
An abuser might stir up conflict
between two targets
by falsely reporting that they’ve made nasty
comments about each other.
Triangulation can be a messy
and destructive business.
But after they’ve escaped their abusers
targets sometimes find themselves using triangulation
not maliciously, but because they feel powerless.
Direct interactions might still arouse too
much vulnerability.
Indirect methods can feel safer.
Instead of dealing with relationship problems
assertively
they might resort to bringing in other people
to defend them, muddying the waters.
Instead of being direct
about their attraction to someone
they might resort to triangulation by using
a third party to try and arouse jealousy.
Even though there’s no malicious intention
the triangulated party can still feel
betrayed or manipulated.
When targets of abuse learn to express
their complaints, their needs and their desires directly
the urge to triangulate will fall away.
Another flea is emotional volatility.
Targets of persistent abuse have often had
to suppress powerful instincts
instincts to defend themselves,
to fight, to escape.
Many targets try to suppress their own thoughts
because they’ve been taught
to believe in thoughtcrime.
Abusive environments are also full
of unacknowledged emotions.
Targets learn to suppress unacceptable feelings.
Which feelings are considered unacceptable
will vary from group to group
but anger is commonly forbidden.
In healthy situations, emotions like anger
have a volume control
rising from annoyance to rage
in graduated degrees.
In abusive situations, because anger
is squashed down
it becomes more like an on-off switch.
Targets’ anger can emerge
in sudden destructive flashes
just like they did with their abusers.
Other examples of fleas include avoiding accountability
hypersensitivity to criticism
and trouble with boundaries.
In their abusers, these traits come from
a place of entitlement.
In targets, these traits arise in response
to excessive punishment
and being shown no healthy respect for their
possessions, privacy and personal space.
When targets see themselves
acting like their abusers
they often feel mortified and wonder if they’ve
become the thing they despise.
But the fact they feel mortified
shows they haven’t.
Their abusers don’t feel remorse.
All of these hangovers from the abusive environment
can have a negative impact on future relationships
and personal development.
But identifying them is the first step
to recovery.
All of these anxious habits can be replaced
with healthier responses
with time, awareness and education
about the after-effects of abuse.
Copying enemies can become an issue in our
relationships with other escapees.
In October 2012, I read a newspaper article
by an ex-Scientologist called Martin Padfield.
He was promoting a conference
a few miles away that day
called ‘The Cult in Your Backyard’.
I hadn’t heard much about Scientology
back then so I drove along.
I learned that the Scientology organisation
was a pseudoscientific high-control group
one that shares a number of parallels
with the religious high-control group,
the Jehovah’s Witnesses.
These include the official promotion
of deceptive tactics
against outsiders including secular authorities
and the practice of shunning former members.
I asked the panelists at the conference what
initially attracted them to Scientology.
Hearing their stories back to back underscored
what a diverse bunch they were
in their backgrounds, their experiences and
their attitudes to Scientology.
Some panelists were still holding onto the
central belief system
practicing Scientology as independent agents.
One practicing panelist
appeared to believe claims
that some Scientologists had manifested abilities
like rolling a pencil across a table without
touching it and seeing through walls.
Another panelist claimed
she could leave her body at will.
On the other end of the spectrum
other panelists were unreservedly scathing
about Scientology’s claims
including the supposed powers
it was said to confer
like telekinesis and mastery over illness.
They viewed Scientology as intrinsically damaging
and disapproved of it in all its forms —
independent or corporate.
What was striking was the respect all of these
ex-members showed each other.
Despite irreconcilable differences
in their positions
the panel — and the audience — were all
able to express themselves
without fear of censorship.
There was no coercion, no silencing of opinions,
no personal attacks.
No suppressive persons.
What united the panelists was their focused
condemnation of abuse.
It was a great example of what a mature atmosphere
of free expression could be.
As we all know, relationships between escapees
from abusive groups aren’t always so smooth.
Some people get condemned for being
too soft and forgiving.
Some are condemned for being
too hard-line and unforgiving.
But what really burns
is when escapees start using
the abusive tactics of their former group
on each other.
At the ‘Cult in Your Backyard’ conference,
one panelist, John McGhee
noted that sometimes independent Scientologists
who’d broken away from the organisation
still engaged in the practice of shunning,
known as disconnection.
To know the pain of shunning simply for disagreeing
and then inflict it on others simply for disagreeing
is an extremely sad example
of copying the enemy.
Some folks I’ve spoken with
have left abusive groups
that had fixed hierarchical structures
dividing members into elite
and subordinate subgroups.
Having hoped to find an open, egalitarian
community of ex-members
they’ve reported experiencing a similar
hierarchical vibe
from some of their fellow escapees.
There’s a sense that some people have carried
their former roles with them.
It can feel like they’ve jumped
out the frying pan
into a slightly smaller frying pan.
And it can spark a lot of distressing memories.
Sometimes people copy their enemies in insidious
ways that might seem positive at first
but their coercive style is a clue
that something else is going on.
Some former targets of abuse try to push other
former targets to forgive their abusers.
They continue to press the point, even when
their advice is repeatedly declined.
They argue and insist and pressurise.
They insinuate that a lack of forgiveness
shows some moral deficiency
or that it’ll somehow backfire
on the unforgiving individual.
These are some of the same manipulations
abusers use to extract forgiveness.
These echoes of our abusers are depressing
but understandable.
When we’ve been exposed to certain behaviour
for an extended period
it becomes a familiar reference model.
Sometimes, without thinking, we fall back
on what feels familiar.
While it’s understandable, it’s important
to recognise these abusive practices
and to do what we can to eradicate them.
Every time we mindfully reject
the degrading practices
of our former abusive environments
we flush out more of the last remnants
of their poison.
Copying enemies can become an issue in our
dealings with our former abusive groups.
Our interactions with them can arouse
a lot of emotions.
To feel anger is perfectly natural.
Some people are against expressing it.
For me the expression of anger in itself
isn’t the problem.
Anger’s healthy and appropriate
when it’s focused on the abuse
like it was in the Scientology conference.
But it becomes destructive when we begin
to vent wildly and indiscriminately
attacking innocent individuals who we lump
together with the abusive elements.
Sometimes whole demographics are demonised.
We attack the body instead of the tumour.
The bullied can become bullies,
in the guise of champions.
Thinking of themselves as rescuers
who stand for justice
they drift into a persecutor position,
actively perpetrating injustice.
Unfocussed anger helps no one —
including ourselves.
Because we can plainly see the false reality
that underpins our old group
it can feel surreal watching members figuratively
walking around on thin air
making assertions with nothing to stand on.
Of course from their angle the ground beneath
us can seem just as insubstantial
as it once did to us.
Getting to a place where both parties can
hear each other can be a delicate process.
It helps if we’re clear about exactly what
we’re trying to achieve.
Why are we doing this?
To feel better about ourselves?
To score points?
Do we want to rip individuals
out of the group at any cost?
Around ten years ago,
an atheist YouTuber told me
he and some other atheists had held one of
their theist friends captive for several hours
subjecting him to intense questioning and
refutation over the existence of his god.
He said they succeeded in de-converting
his friend to atheism
although his friend reported
a great sense of bleakness.
The YouTuber predicted I probably wouldn’t
approve of their method
but emphasised that it worked.
He was right. I was horrified.
I was horrified because it was done to me
— only in reverse.
There was a time in my childhood
when I was backing out
of the religion I’d been indoctrinated into.
But I was forced to stay against my will.
Feeling powerless, I surrendered to a kind
of Stockholm syndrome reaction
embracing a dogmatic ideology
I felt imprisoned by.
I was broken.
Coercive tactics like these have been turned
into a career by some folks.
Born in 1930, Ted Patrick became famous as
a professional deprogrammer
working to break the undue influence of abusive
groups on individuals.
Relatives of targets who’d been recruited
by religious high-control groups
would approach him to help
rescue their loved ones.
Although Patrick’s intentions were positive
his methods were extremely controversial.
He’d arrange forcible abductions
and hold targets against their will
in a secure location.
Family members were brought in
to appeal to the target to come back to them.
It could be an emotionally chaotic environment
in which parents were free
to subject their targets
to threats, mockery and tearful guilt trips.
Although Patrick’s interventions did produce
a few success stories
many of them backfired
driving individuals back to their abusers
with their defences now sky-high.
Steven Hassan, a former recruit
of the Unification Church
otherwise known as the Moonies
has also made it his life’s work
to combat the undue influence
of high-control groups.
Although he’s admitted to sometimes
arranging to meet recruits
under a slightly deceptive pretext
his methods differ substantially from Patrick’s.
Recruits come freely
and can leave at any time.
They’re simply presented
with detailed accurate information
about the group they’ve become
involved with
and allowed to make up their own minds.
If the information prods that
suppressed individual awake —great.
But even if targets go back
to their abusive groups
they’re not left with distressing memories
of being abducted.
And the accurate information
they’ve been given
might start to chime
with their experiences in the group.
They’ve been empowered.
For me, this reflects the prime goal.
It’s not about making people think
what we want them to think.
That’s exactly what abusers do.
It’s about empowering people with the tools
to think for themselves.
I wasn’t dragged out of the abusive groups
I’ve found myself in.
I walked out by myself because I’d been
able to think independently.
When we take independent thinking
as our starting point
forceful combative solutions can give way
to nurturing solutions
centred around the idea of personal growth.
For example, when we see children forced into
the religion of their parents
some of us might want to try
and outlaw child indoctrination.
But another approach is to ensure young children
are educated about all religions
and about the option of ticking ‘none’.
That way we help to empower them with information.
There’ll always be abusers and dogmatists.
Rather than focus on limiting their behaviour
we can limit their influence
by educating and empowering our children.
When you lie down with dogs,
you get up with fleas.
When you leave a poisonous environment
sometimes you take a little poison with you.
But it doesn’t have to be a permanent feature.
Every time we notice
some of that poison in ourselves
we get the chance to detox
by choosing to grow
and define ourselves on our own terms
instead of copying enemies.